feat: migrate release process to agentic customizations (#4553)
GoogleCloudPlatform/spring-cloud-gcp: .agents/skills/spring-cloud-gcp-release/SKILL.md

---
name: spring-cloud-gcp-release
description: Instructions for performing an automated, sequential release of Spring Cloud GCP.
---

# Spring Cloud GCP Release Workflow

This skill guides the agent through the sequential release process for Spring Cloud GCP.

## Prerequisites
1.  The GitHub CLI (`gh`) must be installed and authenticated (`gh auth status`).

> 2.  Your git working directory must be clean.

Reviewer: I'm assuming this will work under the user's ID? e.g mine or your GH account?

Another pre-req in that case would be that you must be a maintainer with write access to the repo

Author: Thanks for the feedback, updated as suggested.

## Release Guidelines & Safety

> *   **Merge Approvals**: You do **not** need to request explicit user approval to merge automated bot PRs (such as the Release PR or the SNAPSHOT bump PR created by `release-please`). You may approve and merge them directly once CI conditions are satisfied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Merge Approvals**: You do **not** need to request explicit user approval to merge automated bot PRs (such as the Release PR or the SNAPSHOT bump PR created by `release-please`). You may approve and merge them directly once the required CI checks pass.
```

> *   **SNAPSHOT PR Merges**: For post-release SNAPSHOT bump PRs, you can merge them as soon as all **required** status checks pass. You do **not** need to wait for optional checks to complete or pass. If the repository policy blocks the merge due to pending optional checks, use administrator privileges (`--admin` flag) to complete the merge.

Reviewer: What is administrator privileges? Does that give an agent admin access to the repo?

Author: Thanks for catching that. I've removed the unnecessary steps so that it's clearer.

*   **Code Change Approvals**: You **must** get explicit user approval before pushing any code fixes or opening any new PRs that you authored (such as the Spring Initializr PR or README update PR).

---

# Release Workflow

> Use this workflow to release any branch (e.g. `main` or a maintenance branch like `7.x`).

Reviewer: How does the agent know which branches are maintenance branches? And which maintenance branches should be worked on? e.g. some may be deprecated

Author: Thanks for the questions. For this workflow, the agent is not expected to determine which are maintenance branches. I've updated the section to make it clear that the user should tell the agent what branches to release.

        ```
3.  For each found dependency upgrade PR, approve and squash-merge it:
    ```bash
    gh pr review <PR_NUMBER> --approve
    gh pr merge <PR_NUMBER> --squash
    ```
4.  Verify fallback:
    *   **If releasing `main`**: Verify that the `gapic-generator-java-bom` PR is merged. If not open/merged, tick its box in the Renovate Dependency Dashboard (Issue #1705) to trigger it.
    *   **If releasing a maintenance branch**: Verify that the `libraries-bom` PR is merged. If not open/merged, tick its box in the Renovate Dependency Dashboard (Issue #1705) to trigger it.

### Step 3: [Conditional] Merge libraries-bom PR (Main branch only)
*This step is only executed if releasing the `main` branch. For maintenance branches, proceed directly to Step 4.*
1.  Search for open PRs with `libraries-bom` in the title:
    ```bash
    gh pr list --base main --search "libraries-bom in:title is:open" --json number
    ```
2.  Trigger the "Generate Spring Auto-Configurations" workflow:
    ```bash
    gh workflow run "Generate Spring Auto-Configurations" --ref main -f branch_name=<PR_BRANCH> -f forked_repo=<FORKED_REPO>
    ```

> 3.  Wait for `cloud-java-bot` to commit changes, verify that modifications are strictly within `spring-cloud-previews/` and that `spring-cloud-previews/README.md` is updated.

Reviewer: for this step, how will the bot know when the bot has commited the changes? Should we have the agent check the github page or pull down a commit?

Author: Thanks for the feedback. I've updated the instructions as suggested.

*   Links to all merged PRs:
    *   Renovate/Dependabot dependency upgrade PRs (e.g. `libraries-bom`, `gapic-generator-java-bom` PRs)
    *   Release PR
    *   Post-release SNAPSHOT PR
*   Links to new PRs created:
    *   `[ACTION REQUIRED]` Spring Initializr PR (requires review and merge)
    *   `[ACTION REQUIRED]` README update PR (requires review and merge)
*   Links to publications:
    *   Maven Central Artifact
    *   Reference Documentation (If missing, flag as `[ACTION REQUIRED] Reference Documentation is missing`)
    *   Javadocs (If missing, flag as `[ACTION REQUIRED] Javadocs are missing`)

---

# Handling CI Failures (Shared)

If a PR merge fails due to failing CI checks:

1.  **Investigate the Failure**:
    *   Retrieve the list of checks for the PR:
        ```bash
        gh pr checks <PR_NUMBER>
        ```
    *   Find the failing check and retrieve its run log using the GitHub CLI or by navigating to the URL:
        ```bash
        gh run view <RUN_ID> --log
        ```
    *   Determine the root cause (e.g., compile error, test assertion failure, transient connection error).

> 2.  **Determine if Flaky**:

Reviewer: Should we also have a step on what to do if the agent determines the failure is not flaky?

Notify the user/ suggest a fix

Author: Thanks for the feedback. Updated as suggested. Also added that flaky tests should also be noted at the final report.

## Prerequisites
1.  The GitHub CLI (`gh`) must be installed and authenticated (`gh auth status`).
2.  The authenticated user must have Admin or Maintainer access to the `GoogleCloudPlatform/spring-cloud-gcp` repository.
3.  Your git working directory must be clean.

## Release Guidelines & Safety
*   **Merge Approvals**: You do **not** need to request explicit user approval to merge automated bot PRs (such as the Release PR or the SNAPSHOT bump PR created by `release-please`). You may approve and merge them directly once the required CI checks pass.
*   **SNAPSHOT PR Merges**: For post-release SNAPSHOT bump PRs, you can merge them as soon as all **required** status checks pass. You do **not** need to wait for optional checks to complete or pass.
*   **Code Change Approvals**: You **must** get explicit user approval before pushing any code fixes or opening any new PRs that you authored (such as the Spring Initializr PR or README update PR).

---

# Release Workflow

Use this workflow to release any branch. The user must explicitly specify which branch(es) to release (e.g. "perform a release for main, 7.x and 6.x branches").

### Step 1: Initialize State

> Create or read a `.release_status.json` file in the root of the repository to track progress.

Reviewer: qq, do you think we need a note here to ensure that the agent does not add it to source?

Author: Thanks for the feedback, updated.

```json
{
  "branch": "<BRANCH>",
  "version": "",
  "step": 1,
  "completed_steps": []
}
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **No Cherry-Picking (Maintenance Branches)**: If the target branch is a maintenance branch (e.g. `7.x`), do NOT perform any code fixes, backports, or cherry-picking of commits. All required fixes must be cherry-picked and merged to the target maintenance branch by the user before starting the release process.

### Step 2: Merge Renovate/Dependabot Dependency Upgrade PRs

> Before updating `libraries-bom` or creating the release, check for and merge open dependency upgrade PRs from Renovate or Dependabot created since the last release tag:

Reviewer: also might be worth noting there may be some rate-limited deps upgrades. not sure how we want the agent to handle this.

Maybe we update the renovate config so that we don't have any rate-limit?

Author: Thanks for the feedback.

1. I've created https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/spring-cloud-gcp/pull/4554 to make it much less likely to be rate-limited.
2. I've updated the instructions to check on rate-limited PRs.

        ```
3.  For each found dependency upgrade PR, approve and squash-merge it:
    ```bash
    gh pr review <PR_NUMBER> --approve
    gh pr merge <PR_NUMBER> --squash
    ```
4.  Verify fallback:
    *   **If releasing `main`**: Verify that the `gapic-generator-java-bom` PR is merged. If not open/merged, tick its box in the Renovate Dependency Dashboard (Issue #1705) to trigger it.
    *   **If releasing a maintenance branch**: Verify that the `libraries-bom` PR is merged. If not open/merged, tick its box in the Renovate Dependency Dashboard (Issue #1705) to trigger it.

### Step 3: [Conditional] Merge libraries-bom PR (Main branch only)
*This step is only executed if releasing the `main` branch. For maintenance branches, proceed directly to Step 4.*
1.  Search for open PRs with `libraries-bom` in the title:
    ```bash
    gh pr list --base main --search "libraries-bom in:title is:open" --json number
    ```
2.  Trigger the "Generate Spring Auto-Configurations" workflow:
    ```bash
    gh workflow run "Generate Spring Auto-Configurations" --ref main -f branch_name=<PR_BRANCH> -f forked_repo=<FORKED_REPO>
    ```

> 3.  Wait for `cloud-java-bot` to commit the auto-generated configurations. Poll the PR's commits list (re-running this command every 2-3 minutes) until a commit authored by `cloud-java-bot` (or containing "Regenerate auto-configurations") is present:

Reviewer: nit: Maybe add a timeout so this doesn't poll forver

Author: Thanks for the feedback, updated.

    ```bash
    gh pr view <PR_NUMBER> --json commits --jq '.commits[] | {message: .message, author: .author.login}'
    ```
    Once the commit is found, verify its files to ensure modifications are strictly within `spring-cloud-previews/` and that `spring-cloud-previews/README.md` is updated:
    ```bash
    gh pr diff <PR_NUMBER> --name-only
    ```
4.  Approve and squash-merge the `libraries-bom` PR.

### Step 4: Merge Release PR

> 1.  Wait for `release-please` to create the Release PR on the target branch:

Reviewer: nit: same here, maybe a timeout in case this fails?

Author: Thanks for the feedback, updated.

    *If Maven Central verification fails or times out, stop the release and report failure.*
2.  **Documentation (OPTIONAL)**: Poll the documentation URLs (timeout 2 hours). Do **not** halt the release if they are missing:
    *   Reference Docs: `https://googlecloudplatform.github.io/spring-cloud-gcp/<VERSION>/reference/html/index.html`
    *   Javadocs: `https://googleapis.dev/java/spring-cloud-gcp/<VERSION>/index.html`
    *Note the publication status (Exists / Missing) of both endpoints to include in the final report.*

### Step 7: Create Spring Initializr PR
Update Spring Initializr with the new Spring Cloud GCP version:
1.  Fork `spring-io/start.spring.io` if not already forked:
    ```bash
    gh repo fork spring-io/start.spring.io --clone=false

>     ```

Reviewer: IIRC, they have their own CLA/signed-commit strategy. If this is a new user who has never done that, we should make sure that the user/ agent has this

Author: Thanks for the feedback, updated.
